Storage: Add Pure Storage storage driver (#14599)
canonical/lxd: doc/reference/storage_pure.md

(storage-pure)=
# PureStorage - `pure`

[PureStorage](https://www.purestorage.com/) is a software-defined storage solution. It offers the consumption of redundant block storage across the network.

> LXD offers access to PureStorage storage clusters using either iSCSI or NVMe/TCP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LXD supports connecting to PureStorage storage clusters through two protocols: either {abbr}`iSCSI (Internet Small Computer Systems Interface)` or {abbr}`NVMe/TCP (Non-Volatile Memory Express over Transmission Control Protocol)`.
```

In addition, PureStorage offers copy-on-write snapshots, thin provisioning, and other features.

> To use PureStorage, ensure the required kernel modules for the selected protocol are installed on your host system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use PureStorage, ensure that the required kernel modules for the selected protocol are installed on your host system.
```

For iSCSI, the iSCSI CLI named `iscsiadm` needs to be installed in addition to the required kernel modules.

## Terminology

Each storage pool created in LXD using a PureStorage driver represents a PureStorage *pod*, which is an abstraction that groups multiple volumes under a specific name.

> Another benefit of using PureStorage pods is that they can be linked with multiple PureStorage arrays to provide additional redundancy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One benefit of using PureStorage pods is that they can be linked with multiple PureStorage arrays to provide additional redundancy.
```

> LXD creates volumes within a pod that is identified by the storage pool name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

LXD creates volumes within a pod that is identified by the storage pool name.
```

> When the first volume needs to be mapped to a specific LXD host, a corresponding PureStorage host is created with the name of the LXD host and a suffix of used protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the first volume needs to be mapped to a specific LXD host, a corresponding PureStorage host is created with the name of the LXD host and a suffix of the used protocol.
```

Reviewer: Can we add an example here of what that PureStorage host name might look like? Like, "For example, a PureStorage host name might be ...".

> The PureStorage host is then connected with the required volumes, to allow attaching and accessing volumes from the LXD host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The PureStorage host is then connected with the required volumes, to allow attaching and accessing volumes from the LXD host.
```

> Created PureStorage hosts are automatically removed once there is no volumes connected to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The created PureStorage host is automatically removed once there are no volumes connected to it.
```

> ## `pure` driver in LXD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The `pure` driver in LXD
```

The `pure` driver in LXD uses PureStorage volumes for custom storage volumes, instances, and snapshots.

> All created volumes are thin-provisioned block volumes, that LXD formats with a desired file system if required (for containers and custom file system volumes).

Author: Thanks for pointing this out. I've just provided some examples. LXD formats the block volume with a file system for custom file system volumes and containers. However, one file system volume is also created for each VM.

IMO, this option nicely describes the situation:
```
If required (for example, for containers and custom file system volumes), LXD formats the volume with a desired file system.
```

LXD expects PureStorage to be pre-configured with a specific service (e.g. iSCSI) on network interfaces whose address is provided during storage pool configuration.
Furthermore, LXD assumes that it has full control over the PureStorage pods it manages.
Therefore, you should never maintain any volumes in PureStorage pods that are not owned by LXD because LXD might disconnect or even delete them.

This driver behaves differently than some of the other drivers in that it provides remote storage.
As a result, and depending on the internal network, storage access might be a bit slower compared to local storage.
On the other hand, using remote storage has significant advantages in a cluster setup: all cluster members have access to the same storage pools with the exact same contents, without the need to synchronize them.

> When creating a new storage pool using the `pure` driver in either `iscsi` or `nvme-tcp` mode, LXD tries to discover one of the array's qualified names on the address `pure.array.address`.

Author: To avoid confusion if we go for `nvme-fc` in the future. But I agree, having it consistent with PowerFlex would make more sense. Will update everywhere.

> When creating a new storage pool using the `pure` driver in either `iscsi` or `nvme-tcp` mode, LXD tries to discover one of the array's qualified names on the address `pure.array.address`.

Reviewer 2: would there also be potentially an iscsi-fc?

> When creating a new storage pool using the `pure` driver in either `iscsi` or `nvme-tcp` mode, LXD tries to discover one of the array's qualified names on the address `pure.array.address`.

Author: There is `scsi-fc` (note missing `i` :))

> When creating a new storage pool using the `pure` driver in either `iscsi` or `nvme-tcp` mode, LXD tries to discover one of the array's qualified names on the address `pure.array.address`.

Reviewer 2: So does pure call nvme over tcp "nvme-tcp"?

> When creating a new storage pool using the `pure` driver in either `iscsi` or `nvme-tcp` mode, LXD tries to discover one of the array's qualified names on the address `pure.array.address`.

Author: Yes.

Those are values in PureStorage:
- `nvme-tcp`
- `nvme-fc`
- `scsi-fc`
- `iscsi`

> When creating a new storage pool using the `pure` driver in either `iscsi` or `nvme-tcp` mode, LXD tries to discover one of the array's qualified names on the address `pure.array.address`.

Reviewer 2: @mionaalex shall we go for consistency with powerflex and have "nvme" mode to mean "nvme over tcp" for both powerflex and pure, or use pure specific terminology of "nvme-tcp" and be different from powerflex driver?

> When creating a new storage pool using the `pure` driver in either `iscsi` or `nvme-tcp` mode, LXD tries to discover one of the array's qualified names on the address `pure.array.address`.

Reviewer 3: @tomponline I'd go for consistency, so either we change Pure, or we change PowerFlex as well to be `nvme-tcp` (don't know if that's feasible at this point). If we go for the former, we can still use `nvme-fc` for fiber channel to distinguish between the two.

> When creating a new storage pool using the `pure` driver in either `iscsi` or `nvme-tcp` mode, LXD tries to discover one of the array's qualified names on the address `pure.array.address`.

Reviewer 2: we shouldnt change powerflex as its published and would break deployments, so "nvme" for pure it is.

> When creating a new storage pool using the `pure` driver in either `iscsi` or `nvme-tcp` mode, LXD tries to discover one of the array's qualified names on the address `pure.array.address`.

Author: Perfect, thank you both. Will update accordingly.

Upon successful discovery, LXD attaches all volumes that are connected to the PureStorage host that is associated with a specific LXD server.
PureStorage hosts and volume connections are fully managed by LXD.

Volume snapshots are also supported by PureStorage. However, each snapshot is associated with a parent volume and cannot be directly attached to the host.
Therefore, when a snapshot is being exported, LXD creates a temporary volume behind the scenes. This volume is attached to the LXD host and removed once the operation is completed.
Similarly, when a volume with at least one snapshot is being copied, LXD sequentially copies snapshots into destination volume, from which a new snapshot is created.
Finally, once all snapshots are copied, the source volume is copied into the destination volume.

(storage-pure-volume-names)=
### Volume names

Due to a [limitation](storage-pure-limitations) in PureStorage, volume names cannot exceed 63 characters.
Therefore, the driver uses the volume's {config:option}`storage-pure-volume-conf:volatile.uuid` to generate a shorter volume name.

> For example, a UUID `5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14` is first trimmed of any hyphens (`-`) resulting in the string `5a2504b06a6c48498ee7ddb0b674fd14`. To distinguish volume types and snapshots, special identifiers are prepended and appended to the volume names, as depicted in the table below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a UUID `5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14` is first trimmed of any hyphens (`-`), resulting in the string `5a2504b06a6c48498ee7ddb0b674fd14`. To distinguish volume types and snapshots, special identifiers are prepended and appended to the volume names, as depicted in the table below:
```

Type            | Identifier   | Example
:--             | :---         | :----------
Container       | `c-`         | `c-5a2504b06a6c48498ee7ddb0b674fd14`
Virtual machine | `v-`         | `v-5a2504b06a6c48498ee7ddb0b674fd14-b` (block volume) and `v-5a2504b06a6c48498ee7ddb0b674fd14` (file system volume)
Image (ISO)     | `i-`         | `i-5a2504b06a6c48498ee7ddb0b674fd14-i`
Custom volume   | `u-`         | `u-5a2504b06a6c48498ee7ddb0b674fd14`
Snapshot        | `s`          | `sc-5a2504b06a6c48498ee7ddb0b674fd14` (container snapshot)

(storage-pure-limitations)=
### Limitations

The `pure` driver has the following limitations:

Volume size constraints

> : Minimum volume size is `1MiB` and has to be a multiply of `512B`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Minimum volume size is `1MiB` and has to be a multiple of `512B`.
```

> : Minimum volume size is `1MiB` and has to be a multiple of `512B`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Minimum volume size (quota) is `1MiB` and must be a multiple of `512B`.
```

Snapshots cannot be mounted

> : Snapshots cannot be mounted directly to the host, which requires creating a temporary volume when accessing snapshot's contents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Snapshots cannot be mounted directly to the host. Instead, a temporary volume must be created to access the snapshot's contents.
```

  For internal operations, such as copying instances or exporting snapshots, LXD handles this automatically.

Sharing the PureStorage storage pool between installations
: Sharing the same PureStorage storage pool between multiple LXD installations is not supported.

>   If different LXD installation tries to create a storage pool with the name that already exists, an error is be returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If a different LXD installation tries to create a storage pool with a name that already exists, an error is returned.
```

Recovering PureStorage storage pools
: Recovery of PureStorage storage pools using `lxd recover` is currently not supported.

## Configuration options

> The following configuration options are available for storage pools that use the `pure` driver and for storage volumes in these pools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following configuration options are available for storage pools that use the `pure` driver, as well as storage volumes in these pools.
```
